RUTH: Ed, how are you getting on with the reading for our presentation next week?

ED: Well, OK, Ruth — but there’s so much of it.

RUTH: I know, I hadn’t realised birth order was such a popular area of research.

ED: But the stuff on birth order and personality is mostly unreliable. From what I’ve been reading, a lot of the claims about how your position in the family determines certain personality traits are just stereotypes, with no robust evidence to support them.

RUTH: OK, but that’s an interesting point — we could start by outlining what previous research has shown. There are studies going back over a hundred years.

ED: Yeah — so we could just run through some of the typical traits. Like the consensus seems to be that oldest children are generally less well-adjusted because they never get over the arrival of a younger sibling.

RUTH: Right, but on a positive note, some studies claimed that they were thought to be good at nurturing — certainly in the past when people had large families, they would have been expected to look after the younger ones.

ED: There isn’t such a clear picture for middle children — but one trait that a lot of the studies mention is that they are easier to get on with than older or younger siblings.

RUTH: Generally eager to please and helpful — although that’s certainly not accurate as far as my family goes — my middle brother was a nightmare — always causing fights and envious of whatever I had.

ED: As I said — none of this seems to relate to my own experience. I’m the youngest in my family and I don’t recognise myself in any of the studies I’ve read about. I’m supposed to have been a sociable and confident child who made friends easily — but I was actually terribly shy.

RUTH: Really? That’s funny. There have been hundreds of studies on twins but mostly about nurture versus nature …

ED: There was one on personality, which said that a twin is likely to be quite shy in social situations because they always have their twin around to depend on for support.

RUTH: My cousins were like that when they were small — they were only interested in each other and found it hard to engage with other kids. They’re fine now though.

ED: Only children have had a really bad press — a lot of studies have branded them as loners who think the world revolves around them because they’ve never had to fight for their parents’ attention.

RUTH: That does seem a bit harsh. One category I hadn’t considered before was children with much older siblings — a couple of studies mentioned that these children grow up more quickly and are expected to do basic things for themselves — like getting dressed.

ED: I can see how that might be true — although I expect they’re sometimes the exact opposite — playing the baby role and clamouring for special treatment.